According to the European Commission, wind energy accounts for more than 14% of the EU’s electricity consumption. However, the Commission has set a target of increasing the share of renewables in the EU’s energy mix to at least 32% by 2030, which will require a significant increase in the deployment of both onshore and offshore windfarms.

In terms of deployment, there are currently more onshore windfarms in Europe than offshore windfarms. The trend is shifting towards more offshore wind energy, however. Is one better than the other? 

Offshore windfarms are in the ocean, often far from the coastline, while onshore windfarms are situated on land, usually in rural areas.

Onshore windfarms are generally less expensive to build and maintain than offshore windfarms. This is because they are located on land, which is easier to access and requires less specialized equipment and personnel.

The average capital cost for onshore wind projects in Europe in 2020 was around €1.4 million per MW. Additionally, the cost of transporting and installing equipment is lower for onshore windfarms, since they are located closer to existing infrastructure such as roads and power lines.

The primary advantage of offshore windfarms is their potential to generate more power than onshore windfarms.

This is due to offshore wind speeds being generally higher and more consistent than those on shore, which translates to higher energy output.

For example, according to the European Commission, an offshore wind turbine in the North Sea can generate up to twice as much electricity as a similarly sized turbine on land.

While wind farms are more expensive to maintain, it is important to note that the cost of wind energy has decreased significantly in recent years due to advancements in technology and increased competition in the industry.

In fact, according to the European Wind Energy Association, the cost of onshore wind energy has decreased by 32% since 2010, and the cost of offshore wind in Europe has fallen by more than 60% since 2010.

In 2020, the average capital cost for offshore wind projects in Europe was around 2.3 million euros per MW.

This makes wind energy an increasingly attractive option for energy production, particularly in developing countries where the cost of traditional energy sources can be inaccessibly high.